README.md, before:

# Valet

An OCaml preprocessor allowing to declare types from `let`-bindings with a
preceeding `val` declaration, “the Haskell way”.

This is an old experiment of mine that I revived and cleaned up when I
discovered https://github.com/ocaml/RFCs/pull/59 which shares the same goal but
does it better.

## Example

When a `val` declaration and a `let` binding follow each other at top-level,
Valet will merge them into one `let` binding with a type constraint. For
instance:

```ocaml
val add : int -> int -> int
let add x y = x + y

(* gets changed into: *)

let add : int -> int -> int = fun x y -> x + y
```

Several `val` declarations can be attached to one `let` binding of multiple
values. This is useful in particular for mutually recursive functions. For
instance:

```ocaml
val factorial : int -> int
val factorial_acc : int -> int -> int

let rec factorial n = factorial_acc n 1
and factorial_acc n acc = if n <= 1 then acc else factorial_acc (n - 1) (n * acc)

(* gets changed into: *)

let rec factorial : int -> int = fun n -> factorial_acc n 1
and factorial_acc : int -> int -> int = fun n acc -> if n <= 1 then acc else factorial_acc (n - 1) (n * acc)
```

For more examples, see [test/valet.t](test/valet.t), which is more comprehensive
and is kept in sync by our CI.

## Usage

Add Valet as a preprocessor in your `dune` file:

```lisp
(executable
 (name my_program)
 (preprocess (pps valet)))
```

If you are curious, the library comes as a standalone executable, `valet`, which
will consume a file and print the OCaml result.

## Limitations

The main limitation, at this point, is that Valet only works for top-level
declarations, and is not available for local bindings. This might be possible in
the future, if https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/pull/14040 gets merged, for
instance.

A second limitation comes from OCaml tooling, which will not expect the use of
`val` in an OCaml file. Most likely, your favourite formatter or documentation
generator will not handle such files in a clean fashion.

Other limitations are not insurmountable but just require me to do the work. One
example is that Valet should generalise type variables, because things like

```ocaml
val f : 'a -> 'b
let f x = x + 1

(* changed into: *)

let f : 'a -> 'b = fun x -> x +1
```

would type just fine in general, while a user could expect it to mean the same
as:

```ocaml
val f : 'a 'b. 'a -> 'b
let f x = x + 1
```

which will indeed be rejected because `int -> int` is less general than `'a 'b.
'a -> 'b`. Another example is that Valet currently does not recurse into
submodules (or into anything, really), so code like:

```ocaml
module Foo = struct
  val bar : int
  let bar = 1
end
```

will get rejected, while there is no fundamental issue preventing this from
being supported.

Finally, there are some other, more subtle, limitations; for instance, Valet
does not behave well when types are universally quantified and multiple values
are bound at once, eg.:

```ocaml
val id : 'a. 'a -> 'a
val add_one : int -> int

let (id, add_one) = ((fun x -> x), (fun x -> x + 1))
```

will fail, while

```ocaml
val id : 'a. 'a -> 'a

let id = fun x -> x
```

and

```ocaml
val add_one : int -> int
val add_one_f : float -> float

let (add_one, add_one_f) = ((fun x -> x + 1), (fun x -> x +. 1.))
```

will both behave as expected.

Commit message:

Redirect to https://github.com/niols/camelotte

README.md, after:

# Valet

> [!WARNING]
> This repository has been merged into [niols/camelotte](https://github.com/niols/camelotte). It is unmaintained.

An OCaml preprocessor allowing to declare types from `let`-bindings with a
preceeding `val` declaration, “the Haskell way”.

This is an old experiment of mine that I revived and cleaned up when I
discovered https://github.com/ocaml/RFCs/pull/59 which shares the same goal but
does it better.

## Example

When a `val` declaration and a `let` binding follow each other at top-level,
Valet will merge them into one `let` binding with a type constraint. For
instance:

```ocaml
val add : int -> int -> int
let add x y = x + y

(* gets changed into: *)

let add : int -> int -> int = fun x y -> x + y
```

Several `val` declarations can be attached to one `let` binding of multiple
values. This is useful in particular for mutually recursive functions. For
instance:

```ocaml
val factorial : int -> int
val factorial_acc : int -> int -> int

let rec factorial n = factorial_acc n 1
and factorial_acc n acc = if n <= 1 then acc else factorial_acc (n - 1) (n * acc)

(* gets changed into: *)

let rec factorial : int -> int = fun n -> factorial_acc n 1
and factorial_acc : int -> int -> int = fun n acc -> if n <= 1 then acc else factorial_acc (n - 1) (n * acc)
```

For more examples, see [test/valet.t](test/valet.t), which is more comprehensive
and is kept in sync by our CI.

## Usage

Add Valet as a preprocessor in your `dune` file:

```lisp
(executable
 (name my_program)
 (preprocess (pps valet)))
```

If you are curious, the library comes as a standalone executable, `valet`, which
will consume a file and print the OCaml result.

## Limitations

The main limitation, at this point, is that Valet only works for top-level
declarations, and is not available for local bindings. This might be possible in
the future, if https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/pull/14040 gets merged, for
instance.

A second limitation comes from OCaml tooling, which will not expect the use of
`val` in an OCaml file. Most likely, your favourite formatter or documentation
generator will not handle such files in a clean fashion.

Other limitations are not insurmountable but just require me to do the work. One
example is that Valet should generalise type variables, because things like

```ocaml
val f : 'a -> 'b
let f x = x + 1

(* changed into: *)

let f : 'a -> 'b = fun x -> x +1
```

would type just fine in general, while a user could expect it to mean the same
as:

```ocaml
val f : 'a 'b. 'a -> 'b
let f x = x + 1
```

which will indeed be rejected because `int -> int` is less general than `'a 'b.
'a -> 'b`. Another example is that Valet currently does not recurse into
submodules (or into anything, really), so code like:

```ocaml
module Foo = struct
  val bar : int
  let bar = 1
end
```

will get rejected, while there is no fundamental issue preventing this from
being supported.

Finally, there are some other, more subtle, limitations; for instance, Valet
does not behave well when types are universally quantified and multiple values
are bound at once, eg.:

```ocaml
val id : 'a. 'a -> 'a
val add_one : int -> int

let (id, add_one) = ((fun x -> x), (fun x -> x + 1))
```

will fail, while

```ocaml
val id : 'a. 'a -> 'a

let id = fun x -> x
```

and

```ocaml
val add_one : int -> int
val add_one_f : float -> float

let (add_one, add_one_f) = ((fun x -> x + 1), (fun x -> x +. 1.))
```

will both behave as expected.
